>> From the Library of
Congress in Washington D.C.
>> Abigail Potter: All right.
Well thanks for coming
everybody.
We're going to get started and
I'm just here to introduce Jer.
Welcome to the Library
of Congress
and to this very special
addition of Artists
in the Archive, I'm Abby
Potter I'm the acting chief
of the Library of Congress
labs, which is also known
as National Digital Initiatives
and I have the pleasure
to introduce our host for the
tonight the wonderful Jer Thorp.
He comes to us from New York
City by way of Vancouver;
he's an artist and educator
exploring the many boundaries
between science,
art, and culture.
His work has been published in
many magazines like Popular,
Science, The New
Yorker and Wired.
He was the data artist in
residence at The New York Times
and as a National
Geographic Fellow,
a Rockefeller Foundation
Fellow and an adjunct professor
in NYUs Interactive
Telecommunications Program
and cofounder of The
Office of Creative Research.
Jer is also the current
Innovator in residence here
at the library, he is part
of a program that labs
as facilitating to bring
people here with creative ideas
and a wide array or experiences
and backgrounds to do new
and interesting things with
our collections of data.
In his time with us Jer
has certainly done this,
he has wrangled our mark
records and made beautiful
and thoughtful entry ways
into our collections,
he's traversed all of our
tunnels and made friends
with people he's come across
and he's exposed the vastness
and smallness in
this institution.
He's applied his talents to
translating the intangibles
of the Library of Congress to
an audience that may not know
that much about us and this
podcast is a get example of that
and I'm really looking
forward to tonight's episode
and there's a not
about the recording
since we are live streaming
just if you can wait to applause
at Jer's signal and he
says it will be obvious.
[Laughter] all right.
>> This Start.
>> The American Stereoscopic
Company, 1897.
>> One photographic print
on stereo cart, stereograph.
>> The Beginning.
>> Team Edwards, 1992.
>> 122 pages.
>> The Beginning.
>> Catherine Coulter, 2005.
>> 534 pages.
>> The Beginning.
>> Team Edwards, 2001
>> 181 pages.
>> The Beginning a Novel.
>> Patrick D. Smith 1998.
>> 324 pages.
>> In the Beginning,
Selected Poems.
>> 1959.
>> 32 pages.
>> In the Beginning a
Treillage of One Act Plays.
>> Isabel Bar, 1945.
>> 64 pages.
>> In the Beginning Mist
of the Western World
Retold in Poetry and Pros.
>> Lilly Peter, 1983.
>> 68 pages with
illustration, some color.
>> In the Beginning
Some Mixed Choirs,
Acapella with Mezzo
soprano Solo,
Text from Genesis
chapters 11, to 27.
>> Aaron Copeland, 1947.
>> One manuscript
score, 46 leads.
>> In Beginning Was
the End for Harps,
A Cord and Accordion, 1989.
>> [Inaudible] 1997.
>> Two scores 25 pages.
>> The Beginning Place.
>> Ursula K. Le Guin, 1980.
>> 138 pages.
>> The Beginning of
August, Tom Donahue, 2001.
56 pages.
>> The Beginning of Difficulty,
[inaudible] Chase,
1989, 58 pages.
>> The Beginning of a Mortal
[inaudible] 1933, 253 pages.
>> The Beginning of Calamities,
Tom House 2003, 288 pages.
>> The Beginnings of
American Literature,
Ann Carol, 1965, 324 pages.
>> The beginning of Shaker
Applesauce [inaudible] 1907 one
photographic print.
>> The Beginning of
Sorrows A Novel Based
on the San Francisco
Earthquake of 1989.
>> David A. Greene 1996.
>> 164 pages.
>> The start of the
round the world fight.
>> 1924.
>> One photographic print.
>> The Beginnings of
Critical Realisms in America.
>> Vernon Louis Parrington,
2013.
>> 429 pages.
>> Map of the Canal Route at
the beginning of an occupation.
>> CR Jones 1935.
>> One map photo copy,
100x120 centimeters.
>> In this, the beginning
of Japan's Fifth Year
of Their Declared War.
>> Mildred Lee, 1993.
>> 38 pages.
>> Appearance of
Phenomenon Immediately
After the Beginning of Totally.
>> Vincent Brooks, 1862.
>> Two prints,
chromolithographic.
>> Two men on motorcycle
at the start of a race
with two men supporting the
motorcycles near Boise, Idaho.
>> Alton Jones, 1911.
>> One photographic print.
>> General and Mrs. William
Mitchell training young dogs
at the beginning of
the quail Season.
>> Date unknown.
Photographer unknown.
>> One photographic print.
>> Evacuations of government
buildings was orderly
as sirens sounded the start of
a giant civil defense exercise.
>> Author Jones, 1911.
>> One photographic print.
>> Roberto Clemente
and other members
of the Pittsburgh Pirates
baseball team during the playing
of the Nation Anthem at the
beginning of a baseball game.
>> Jim Henson, 1967.
>> One photographic print.
>> The Beginnings of Naturalism
an American Fiction a study
of the works of Hamlin Garland,
Stephen Crane and Frank Norris
with special reference to
some European references.
>> 1961.
>> 505 pages.
>> A Negro girl sings
and claps her hands
as D.C. National Guard trucks
roll along the Constitution
Avenue here, August
28, before the start
of the Civil Rights
March on Washington.
>> New York World
Telegram, 1963.
>> One photographic print.
Jelloton silver 7x9 inches.
>> Jer Thorp: There
should be audio here
but the audio is not can
you check the audio feed
from this machine?
We're going to edit
this part out [laughter]
>> What did you do?
>> Jer Thorp: I'll
try it one more time.
>> Yeah. [Inaudible]
>> Jer Thorp: All right.
Well, there's going to be
audio there, hello and welcome
to another episode of
The Artist in the Archive
if you've already been
listening to our podcast,
you're probably know a little
bit about what to expect
for the next hour, but for all
of you new listeners let me
take a minute to catch up.
My name is Jer Thorp, I'm
an artist and a teacher
and a writer from Brooklyn, last
year the folks at the Library
of Congress asked me to come
here and spend six months
as the Innovator
in residence, well,
this invitation was exciting and
nebulous enough that I jumped
at the opportunity and since
October I've been wondering
through the halls and stacks
of the library thinking
about how the constitutions
enormous data
as scores might be put to
novel and creative uses.
Along the way I've talked to
so very many interesting people
and I've had the chance to see
the chance to see so many very,
very interesting things.
Now this podcast is a chance to
share those interesting things
and people with you,
and to share the
things I've been doing.
Now, this episode is a little
bit different; now for starters,
I'm recording this in front
of an audience, hi everyone.
>> Hello.
>> Hey.
>> Jer Thorp: We're
also doing this
in the grand surroundings
well, much grander surroundings
than my makeshift home
and studio in Brooklyn.
We're in the Whittall Pavilion
in the Jefferson Building
at the Library of Congress; it's
kind of an amazing room, right?
Now, let me see how can I
describe it to you who all
of you who weren't here?
Oh, I know, Joel can
you describe it for us?
>> Joel Snyder: Why not.
I would say that this
high ceilinged room,
first of all, is rectangular.
About the size of one
half of tennis court.
Each wall is topped by a
white balustrade or railing
as one might see on a balcony,
below it is a long strip
of white extending along
each side of the room.
Below the ornamental
top are square panels
in two shades of yellow.
Lighting is set behind the
balustrade glowing toward
the ceiling.
Five rows of chairs
with a center aisle are
set facing a platform
with two chairs behind this
arrangement is a large wood
cabinet flanked on the left
by the United States flag
and on the right by the blue
flag of the Library of Congress.
The left of the U.S flag is
an exit and then a candelabra
with three glowing lights,
by lighting a hidden
shoulders portrait
of a stern faced gentleman.
To the right of the Library of
Congress flag is a glass case
with wood recorders on display,
another three light candelabra
and in the corner a sculpture
in black on a white pedestal,
the sculpture depicts a male
and a female nude in an embrace
and kiss while seated.
The male's right arm rests
on the females left thigh.
As you face the platform,
the left side
of the room features three glass
case displays, in the center,
a violin cello flanked
by two cases each containing
two violas with a violin.
The right side of the room
has four rectangular windows,
two on either side of the
French doors in the center,
the doors are set behind a
tall rot iron gate on each side
of the gate at center,
is the delicate rot
iron design of a violin.
At the rear of the room is a
black sculpture of two nudes,
at left, a female is on
Her knees reaching
up in the embrace
and kiss of a seated male.
Behind this display is ramp, you
may have used to enter the room.
On the wall to the right
of the ramp is a Tapestry
about five feet high
and seven feet
across depicting a forest scene
with eight individuals
in medieval dress.
The room is carpeted in a
blue and green floral pattern
with pink blossoms and finally,
for this presentation two large
screen displays are at the left
and right of the platform
in the front of the room.
Does that sum it for
you Jer [laughter]
>> Jer Thorp: Joel
Snyder is a true pioneer
in the field of audio
description.
For almost forty years he's been
describing media and arts events
for the blind and the
visually impaired.
To pick just a few of
the projects he'd work
on in those last decades Joel
and his staff has produce audio
descriptions for Sesame Street,
for the National Park Service
and for the Presidential
Inauguration Parades
in 2009 and 2013.
Joel, tell me a little bit
about audio description.
>> Joel Snyder: Well,
thank you Jer I'm happy
to because it's ironically
enough it's an access technique
that needs visibility, if
you'll forgive the expression.
The title on my book on audio
description published in 2014
by the American Council
of the Blind is,
"The Visual Made Verbal" and
that's what description is,
it's a translation of visual
images to words, synced words,
vivid, imaginative to convey
that visual image of television,
of film, of theater, of dance,
of operas, museum displays
to a significant population.
In this country alone there are
over twenty one million
Americans who are either blind
or to quote American
Foundation of Blind study,
or have trouble seeing
even with correction,
twenty one million that's
8% of the population.
>> Jer Thorp: Well,
we're going to hear
from Joel a few times
during today's episode.
One of the things
I've discovered
from recording this
podcast about the library
and all the amazing objects
is just how difficult it is
to give a good description of
things and I knew that people
who were listening the
podcast who might not be able
to see what we're talking
about or to look at a picture
that we post on link,
would benefit tremendously
from Joel's work, so thank
you Joel and we're hear
from you a little bit later.
Now, of all the mysterious and
wonderful nooks and crannies
of this place perhaps
the most delightful
and certainly the most
intriguingly made is the
Catbird Seat.
Home to the library's
poetry department,
located up in the attic floor
of this building the room
overlooks the Grand Hall
to one side and the roof to
the Capitol in the other.
In summary, I think it's fair to
see that our first guest has one
of the best offices
in the world.
Robert Casper is head of the
Poetry and Literature Center
at the Library of Congress.
Hello Robert and welcome
to Artists in the Archive.
>> Robert Casper: Hi.
>> Jer Thorp: Come on up.
Robert, you're permanence
is different from a lot
of the other departments
in the library,
not only because you have
the best office [laughter]
but also unlike all the
other departments or most
of the other departments
you're not necessarily a
collecting department.
If I go up to the poetry
departments I'm not going
to find stacks and
stacks of poetry,
instead I'm maybe am
going to find poets.
>>Robert Casper: You may,
you'll definitely find us.
But there are a number
of divisions and centers
at the library that are
not collections based.
I think we're most note
worthy for being the home
of the U.S Poet Laureate.
>> Jer Thorp: Can
you tell us that,
I think all of us have heard
about the poet laureate,
but we might have some
confusion as to what they do.
Can you tell us what
the poet laureate does?
>> Robert Casper: Right.
The poet laureate position was
originally called the consult
in poetry position,
it was established
around eighty years ago by
the Library of Congress;
it was changed by an
active congress in 1985
to its current title the poet
laureate consultant in poetry
at the Library of
Congress, a real mouthful.
The poet laureate,
according to the law,
is selected by the librarian of
congress based entirely on merit
and there really isn't anything
that a poet laureate has to do
in the position, we usually
have the poet laureate give an
opening and a closing talk to
kick off our literary season
in September and end
things in the end of April,
beginning of May; but
other than that, really,
the laureate serves as
an ambassador for the art
and represents the office
and the library in his
or her trips throughout
the country that year.
>> Jer Thorp: And you've had
some pretty amazing American
poets as poet laureate, Robert
Frost, Gwendolyn Brooks,
Billy Collins, Rita Dove,
and the most recent poet
laureate, Tracy K. Smith.
I didn't ask you here to talk
about poet laureate's though,
I asked you here to
show everybody and talk
about maybe my favorite object
that I've had the chance
to see while I've been here
and this object is sitting
on the table in front of the
us and what it is actually,
why don't you tell
us what it is.
>> Robert Casper: Sure.
When I started at the
library about seven years,
first of all ago I found this
book in one of the drawers
of the old furniture that
we have given to us notably
by Gertrude Whittall, in
the early '40s the person
for him this room is named.
This is a book that says on its
cover, "Poets Corner" I open it
up to realize that it has
all the days of the year
and signatures of
various poets and writers,
and even a few Library of
Congress staff who've been
up in the office for
events or what have you,
and it covers basically
the eighty years
of the offices history.
So you have all sorts of
wonderful famous people
and you have a lot of people
who weren't famous in here.
>> Jer Thorp: Let's
take a moment
to describe this book, Joel.
>> Joel Snyder: Sure.
This is a small, small
diary like bound volume
and rectangular shaped
situated vertically.
The edges of its brown front
are slightly worn although,
it is adorned with
gold ornamentation,
lines that frame the shape.
To the right at center
is a brass lock,
at bottom in gold lettering,
"Poets Corner" the book's
pages are lined horizontally
and at the top of each
page is the month and date
at the top left of each page is
printed the number 19 [laughter]
>> Jer Thorp: Yeah.
So this object fascinates me
and I'll tell you why it's
because every poet
who's done a reading
at the library has signed
this book, well, most of them,
let's say not of
them, an awful lot
of them have signed this book.
[Laughter] and they signed
it across the span of many,
many decades, you know
what the earliest signature
in the book is?
>> Robert Casper: I think
the earliest signature is
from the early '40s but
I wouldn't who's it was
or when it was but I think
we've discovered them
from I think, 1941, 1942.
>> Jer Thorp: So along with
a signature from 1941 and 42,
you might have a
signature from last week.
And by the way the
book is organized
and by the way it
says it's called,
"Poets Corner" I love this.
What this was intended
for was for a poet
and the poet would write they
would write their poetry in sort
of day by day and it would be
a day to collect your poems,
but instead of doing that you
collected poets in this book.
Every page in this book is a
day in the year, 365 pages,
and they're all signed
by different people
so if we picked a
page at random,
Robert can you pick
a page at random?
[Laughter] we'll find
[inaudible] so which date
>> Robert Casper: Well, this is
April 3, it's one of the pages
that doesn't have a marker,
but in 1959 on April 3
Robert Frost was here.
The problem with a lot of these
signatures is they're really
hard to read [laughter] Greg
Gliner a poet who I've heard
of was here in 1979 from Iowa,
it was first signed in 1953
by a woman named Christine
whose last name I can't read
from New York, New York.
>> Jer Thorp: And we could
page through this book
and you'll have a chance to
take a look at afterwards
for the people in the audience
and we'll post as many pictures
as we can for the people
who are listening along,
when I saw this book for the
first time I think we picked
three pages, more
or less at random,
on the first page was Borges on
the second page was Robert Frost
and on the third page
three lines apart
from each other were
Allen Ginsberg
and Paul Simon [laughter] and
what I love about the book is
that it offers these connections
between people that you,
as somebody who knows American
poetry inside and out or me,
as somebody who does not know
American poetry very well.
In our minds, kind of, come
up with a connection
between these poets.
One of the things that
we're going to be talking
about throughout the course of
this podcast show are things
that act exactly like this book.
There are things that act
as the kind of instrument
to play a wide collection
of in this case kind
of poets and their work.
One of most interesting things
that I imagined about this
and this is where I get
a little I was going
to use the word poetic,
it's not the right word.
>> Robert Casper: Feel free.
>> Jer Thorp: Is that on a day
like today, maybe we can find,
can we find today in the book?
We have this instrument
which allows to us kind
of condor a list of poets
and in my head these poets
would be sitting together
in this room, advert seat
and they would have a kind
of a dialog with each other.
Who do we have today?
>> Today we have Tom Stoppard
from 1982 and Wilbert Snow
from 1961, M. Travers from
1954 and a lot of other people
who just have terribly
illegible.
[Laughter] various other people,
it's actually a pretty full day,
it's one of those days
that makes it hard
for contemporary readers at
the poetry and literary center
to find a place to sign so.
>> Jer Thorp: It would be a
crowded day in the Catbird Seat
if we were going to get
all of them together.
One question that I wanted
to ask you is sort of related
to this but it's more of a
discussion about a new position
that you've I think just
this year come up with,
which is the is it called
the youth poet laureate?
>> Robert Casper: It's
not our position, no, no.
And in fact, for many years
we've avoided having anything
to do with other poet laureate
positions because of the fact
that we have this law
that established our position it
is a U.S poet laureate position.
This year we featured the
National Youth Poet Laureate
part of a [inaudible] program
that comes from Urban Word
from New York City,
a nationwide program.
We've featured the first ever
youth poet laureate giving the
opening reading for our new
poet laureate, Tracy K. Smith,
so that was a big deal.
We've also went subsequently
featured the youth poet laureate
in events, selects events
including one coming
up in just a week, but one of
the great joys of this job is
of the institution is that
it gives me the opportunity
to champion the work that
other organizations are doing,
other individuals are
doing to promote poetry
because the laureateship and
the library is so instrumental
to our creative life and that
sort of the understanding
of what libraries do so it's
a great place to bring people
like Amanda Gorman, who
was a real firecracker
of a first National Youth
Poet Laureate to the library.
>> Jer Thorp: If people do want
to get involved more
close closely
with what the poetry department
is doing, you have a blog
which you've been running since
2012 and it's fabulous and full
of a wealth of information
that can you find
at blogs.LOC.gov/catbird, right?
>> Robert Casper: Yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: And are
there any particular events
that are coming up that you
think people might be interested
to tune in for to watch?
>> Robert Casper: Yeah.
April 19 our current
poet laureate,
Tracy K. Smith will give her
closing, really more of a talk
and for the first time it'll be
followed by moderate discussion
by Washington Post
book editor Ron Charles
who also has a written series
with us called, "Life of a Poet.
That's all I'll say
about it now,
but it should be a really
note worthy eventually.
In the room across the way,
in the Coolidge Auditorium
so people can come to that.
>> Jer Thorp: I have
one more question
and this is a selfish
one, have you thought
about getting this
book digitized?
>> Robert Casper: No, but
I was seated next to one
of your follow up
guests who I talked
to about maybe repairing
the book a little bit
because there's a
page that's coming out
and it could use a little love.
>> Jer Thorp: Well, you just
gave me the best que possible
for our next guest, but
thank you Robert Casper.
>> Robert Casper: My pleasure.
[Applauding]
[Music]
>> Jer Thorp: That was the
transition you should have
heard earlier.
[Laughter]
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
Better late than never.
[Laughter]
>> Jer Thorp: And this
is next transition.
[Music]
F. Holland Day was
born in Boston in 1864
to a millionaire father; he
was an extraordinary man not
in the least for
the figure he cut,
he'd often be spotted wearing on
opera cloak, a broad black hat,
a long cigarette holder with
a flat Russian cigarette.
He worked in his
pajamas, wearing a turban
and a yellow dressing
[inaudible] with red slippers
that turned up at the toes.
He wrote, or so it's
told by the light only
by the light of 41 candles.
Our next guest is
Adrienne Lundgren
who is the senior conservator,
senior photo conservator
with a okay, you say it.
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
[Inaudible]
>> Jer Thorp: Yeah.
[Inaudible] Adrienne.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yeah?
>> Jer Thorp: Welcome to
the Artists in the Archive.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Thank you
so much it's an honor, really.
>> Jer Thorp: Now, you
have had a chance to dig
in to F. Holland Day's career
to an extraordinarily level.
Can you tell us the story
about how that happened?
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Well,
it started because I work here
at the library and we
have the best collection
of the F. Holland Day
probably in the world,
we have the largest for sure
collection, came directly
from his estate upon his death
and I became very interested
in just learning about how
people I wanted to do a project
where I created a material space
catalog raising [inaudible]
photographer to really show how
people could look at photographs
as objects, not just as images
and the Day collection
really stood out as something
that had incredible
depths and provenance
and so I was awarded a Kluge
Staff Fellowship in 2012
to really look into his work.
And as a conservator, I did that
in a materials way so looking
at all of his papers and
the way he mounts things
and how he process
things and everything.
So I looked at all
seven hundred well,
before we had seven hundred
and thirty something prints
and now we have found
seven hundred
and fifty something
prints now so
>> Jer Thorp: So
in total you have?
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
Seven hundred
and fifty two at my last count.
>> Jer Thorp: Okay.
So we have a few we tried
the get the prints here,
but they're very important,
you needed an armed escort
and something like that and
guns in this room so we said no,
we're going to show you some
digital images and Joel's going
to describe a couple
of them for us,
but not this particular image.
I know you picked a few of
them just represented kind
of a span of
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yeah.
Things that he's known to have
photographed in his career,
kind of, periods of his work.
So this one is he's
known for male nudes
and this male nude was made
probably in 1898, 1899 and it's
of someone that we imagine well,
it's the archival record doesn't
really tell us all that much,
but we image that they
were probably lovers
or he definitely had a
romantic interest in this fellow
to this is Thomas Langryl
Harris and he's in the pose
of dying slave inspired by
Michelangelo's dying slave so.
I always loved this piece.
>> Jer Thorp: And this image?
>> Adrienne Lundgren: [Laughter]
so this is what Day is most
known for which is his focus
on sacred subjects are he
reenacted passion of Christ
and so on the cross here you
see F. Holland Day himself,
and he kind of created this
cross and crucified himself,
like, with ropes, but
starved himself, well,
he was very thin any way's so
who knows if he starved himself,
but he grew his beard and his
hair and he reenacted The Road
to Calvary, The Crucifixion
and you can show the next one
which is I think, the
Seven Last Words of Christ,
so it's the seven last thoughts
that Christ thought dying
on the cross and then he also
does the Resurrection and yeah,
so that's Day right there.
>> Jer Thorp: Joel as a
description for this image.
>> Joel Snyder: This is a series
of seven crucifixion images set
out horizontally, but each
is focused on the head
of the bearded Christ
wearing a crown of thorns.
The images are set between
drawings of columns from left
to right Christ with eyes
reflecting a forlorn weariness
gazes up and to the right.
Then to the left, downcast, and
to the right with eyes closed
with his mouth and eyes
open wide while turned
to the left and up.
Then with eyes cast downward,
next with his head back
and eyes closed, lips
slightly parted and finally,
with eyes closed and his head
lying on his right shoulder.
The columns support a railing or
[inaudible] which words appear,
"Father forgive them they
know not what they do"
"Today thou shalt be with
me in paradise" "Woman,
behold thy son, son
by mother" "My God,
my God why has thou
forsaken me?"
"I thirst into thy hands"
I commend my spirit"
"It is finished"
>> Jer Thorp: This
image is so striking.
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
Isn't it incredible?
>> Jer Thorp: Yeah.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: I mean,
I'm just fascinated by this.
So this image was done F.
Holland Day had in 1904, like,
catastrophic studio fire and he
lost many of his prints and most
of his negatives in that fire
and most people consider his
career over at that point,
but actually, I think
that the work that he does
after that studio fire is even
more spectacular than the work
that he did before and
this image comes a year
after that studio fire.
So he went to the Hampton
Normal and Agricultural School
in Hampton, Virginia, which
is now Hampton University,
and he took photographs there
of the faculty and the students;
they had a camera club
and so he went to work
with the students there.
And I just think the images from
Hampton are some of his best.
I love how she's so
shadowed in the front
and then the girl bend
behind her is like luminous.
>> Jer Thorp: And Joel ad
a description of this image
as well because think it's
just, yeah it's wonderful.
>> Joel Snyder: A black and
white photograph rectangular
and set vertically
an interior of a room
with a curtained
window at right,
in the four grounded right,
the Silhouette of black woman
to the left and behind her
is a younger black female
in a bright white dress,
her hair adorned behind
her head with a white bow.
>> Jer Thorp: One more image
and then we'll get deep
into what these images are
because I think it's
fascinating.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yeah.
So this is from Day, he did a
lot of allegorical subjects,
the Prodigal's Son and this is
one part of a series called,
"Orpheus" I just really liked
the composition of this,
the way it's printed and you'll
see in a lot of the images
that we showed of Day
he has a very unique way
of mounting his images on these
multi layered paper supports,
I just that they add
a lot to the feeling
and tension surrounding
the image and he was kind
of the inventor of this style
of mounting which become known
as the American Style.
>> Jer Thorp: So Day was part
of a photography movement
called photo secession, right?
>> Adrienne Lundgren yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: I love this
term, the photo secession,
apparently it was chosen mainly
because the word secession would
raise the hackles of Americans
as they felt like I was
a very abrasive term
and Alfred Stieglitz, who
was one of the other founders
with this conversation
that I stumbled upon
with Gertrude Käsebier
in which she said,
what is photo secession, and
am I a photo secessionist?
And he said well, do you
feel like you are one?
And she said, I do.
And he said, well,
that's all there is to it.
>> Adrienne Lundgren actually,
he was Alfred Stieglitz
said you were [laughter]
and actually Day was
part of pictorialism,
but not so much photo secession
because photo secession you
needed Alfred Stieglitz's
dissension and they
actually were not simpatico.
So he was never part of the
formal movement although,
his art is really
part point of view
that movement so
it's interesting.
>> Jer Thorp: And I think
what you're just describing
about the objects sits
really well with kind
of that movement what's
said that was significant
about a photograph was not what
was in front of the camera,
but the manipulation of the
image by the photographer.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yes.
>> Jer Thorp: And
I'm generalizing
in probably a terrible way.
So talk about how these
photographs physically
were made.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: Because
I think it's different
from what we would
sometimes imagine.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yeah.
So with this particular
era of photography,
they were really trying to
legitimize photography and kind
of put it on the same level as
other types of art like drawing
and painting; and one of the
ways that they did that was
through the manipulation
of the print.
So one of the processes
that allowed
for this really varied
manipulation was called the
platinum process.
So almost not everything Day
made, but most everything
that he printed in his career
was made using the platinum
printing process and platinum
is basically a paper support
and the image is actually
made with platinum metal
that is deposited into
the fibers of that paper.
So they're extremely
stable, if made correctly,
and were called the
prints of processes these
because it has this
incredible richness and kind
of what we call the
dynamic range,
the levels between the bright
white and the dark, dark.
Yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: I think
there are some artists
in our next guest who's from the
manuscript department will have
some experience with
this who are meticulous
in their recording of
when a work was made
and how it was made
and so on and so on.
It sounds to me like a
lot of your work is trying
to like puzzle together the,
sort of, true dates of some
of these works, maybe some
people in the room know this,
but some people do not,
but in the basement
of the Madison Building there
is an electron microscope
and like a [inaudible] there's a
full, like, forensic laboratory
that could totally be out
of a television show it's
really amazing.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: So can
you talk about, like,
the actual techniques
that you're using to try
to make sense of this
large collection of images?
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yeah.
So I mean, one of the things
that I'm using is just really
systematic looking, like,
understanding how
these processes work
and really cataloging all
the different variations
that an artist could
use in making out.
So that might include just
like I said, the mounts,
just cataloging systematically
the mounts, but also looking
at elemental composition
of the image.
So really looking at
how that image was made
and you can't always
do that with your eye.
So one of the techniques that
we use is x ray fluorescence
spectroscopy where we actually
it's a non distractive technique
and you point that x ray beam at
the image and it excites atoms
and gives you a spectra of the
elements that are in that sheet
of paper and if you take
that spectra and combine it
with the knowledge
of the processes you can
really determine what type
of technique they were using.
So in the first image that we
looked up with the dying slave
of Thomas Langryl Harris, that
image it's a platinum print,
so it contains platinum, but
it also contains a large peek
for mercury, so we know that
it was mercury process platinum
print, which gives
it this brown tone.
So artists tended to use
certain techniques habitually
through their career
and so you can start
to understanding how much
manipulation they're doing,
when they transfer from
technique, one technique
to another, and it
kind of help you date
and at tribute images to them.
>> Jer Thorp: One thing
that I didn't bring
up with our last guest, Robert
that I could have brought up was
that the poetry department
sometimes is sort
of either responsible for
or becomes the conduit
to new discoveries of
poems that are attributed.
I know that fairly recently
there was a new Walt Whitman
poem that was discovered from
the manuscripts department
or the sorry the
periodicals department.
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
Oh, interesting.
>> Jer Thorp: A poem that was
labeled WW somebody thought, oh,
well, maybe this could
very well be a Whitman.
Have there been photographs
that we didn't know
that were F. Holland Day's
that we now know are?
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Yes.
Actually, there was
an interesting case
where the curator in prints and
photographs bought down a print
that had come in through the
Clarence H. White collection
and F. Holland Day and Clarence
H. White were really good
friends, he was the
Godfather to one of their kids
and they had a very close
working relationship.
They both did photographs
at the same time,
so sometimes it can be difficult
when photographers are working,
kind of, with the same
subjects and stuff
to tell who's making what print.
This print came down, it came
in through the Clarence H. White
but it was unattributed
and through my work
on cataloging all of
his photographic mounts
and his techniques I was able
to link that print to Day
and then I started really
looking at the literature trying
to find any references
that might be somewhere
and I was able to find
a print mounted almost
in exactly the same
banner that was published,
so it was kind the
cataloging and then looking
at the historic literature
and we've been able
to attribute quite a few
images that were misattributed
or unattributed to Day now in
our collection, I think a total
of six images that we've been
able to clarify the attributing.
>> Jer Thorp: Last episode
we talked about an experiment
that somebody in the labs
department did, Laura Ruble,
who's sitting a few
rows back over here,
made a really excellent little
tool that takes photographs
and breaks them down
into small color pallets.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Right.
>> Jer Thorp: Which
you can use to read
across an archive
of photographs.
I could imagine one of the
challenged as to being involved
in photography is like,
how do you hold more
than the five images than
we seen today in your mind
for long enough to
remember how do these things
and so the conversion of these
photographs into data I think,
greatly it's just that process.
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
Absolutely.
>> Jer Thorp: And I know
that is some of the work
that you're looking
to do, right?
Is the sort of, I hate this
term but I'll use it once,
kind of big data techniques
to analyze the collection
as a whole, can you
talk a little bit
about what you're doing?
>>Adrienne Lundgren: Yeah.
I mean, just with Day
or in other things too?
>> Jer Thorp: In general, yeah.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: I'm just
really interested in, I mean,
conservators are very good
at systematic looking kind
of it's part of the job
description, but we haven't been
so good necessarily at recording
that in a way over time
where we could start
to really see what
that data told us beyond maybe
what an individual brings
to the table, but really
looking at hundreds of things
and then what does that
data tell us about things
that we may never
have noticed before.
So, you know, I did that with
Day and it's led to the redating
of some prints, the
reattribution
of many of the prints.
Right now I'm also
looking at civil war maps
so that's one thing that I'm
looking at with big data,
but I think actually the
not exciting one I'm working
on right now is looking
in the collections the
general collection books,
we have seventy eight
thousand books that are
on photographic technologies
so of course,
when I went into those
docs my head like exploded
because it was incredible, it
was the most amazing things,
it's one of my favorite
places on earth and I know
that makes me a total nerd but
>> Jer Thorp: You're
in good company.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: It
was just like so amazing
and then you open these
books and you realize
that there are actually
photographs in those books.
When conservators can see
photographs of a known date
and then we would
have the recipes
for when they made those
photographs how they made them,
I was, like, oh, my gosh we
should start to mine this
and I call it mapping the
geno mode 19th century
manufactured photography.
So how do we take it beyond just
one sample and actually start
to catalog this data so that
it can show us new things
about photography
that was manufactured
in the 19th century;
and so we've started
to mine the fifteen hundred
samples that we have collected
and we're seeing like corporate
takeovers in photography
that were happening in the
1880s with [inaudible] you know,
and like just really
fascinating things
that we never would
have understood before.
So I think has a lot
>> Jer Thorp: Egg politics.
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
Egg politics, right?
It's a dirty [inaudible]
>> Jer Thorp: That was part
of the reason that I wanted
to have this conversation
with you today was just sort
of just get this sense of what
these types of techniques offer
as a kind of way into this
largeness of an archive
that is otherwise
sometimes I think can feel
really impenetrable.
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
Absolutely.
We have, you know, sixteen
million photographs.
>> Jer Thorp: Yeah.
>> Adrienne Lundgren:
So we have a lot of work
to do with mining it but
>> Jer Thorp: And
also to learn more
about F. Holland Day I mean,
what an amazing individual.
I think that in some ways
Day was a human version
of this book, right?
Where he was a, kind of,
a bridge between so
many different people
and so many different
times, he found a Coplin
and Day publishing which was
maybe most famous for kind
of publishing this idea of
kind of the small magazine
in America, he was part
of a social club
called The Visionists.
>> Yeah.
>> Which included amongst
others Bliss Carmen,
and Ralph Adams Cram and Harbert
Small and all kinds of people
and then I think my
favorite weird connection,
so through his philanthropic
work he was friends
with a social worker
named Jessie Fremont Beale
and one day Jessie Fremont Beale
wrote F. Holland Day a note
and that note read, "I
wonder if you may happen
to have an artist friend who
would care to be interested
in a little Assyrian boy
whose name is Kahlil G.,
who of course, was
Kahlil Gibran.
This story it blows me
away, is there one piece
of F. Holland Day
amazing strangeness
that you want to leave with us?
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Well,
I love that he's fascinating
to study because of
his meticulous nature,
which I think comes out of his
publishing days, but he's also
such a he was such a generous
person and every letter
that you see written to him was
thank you for thinking of me,
thank you for sending me this,
thank you for giving me my
education, sponsoring me
for this, and so
I think, you know,
his work with Kahlil Gibran
being able to become the writer
that he was in direct
relationship
to him knowing F. Holland Day
and so it just feels really
great to study someone who's
so fascinating, but also
such a wonderful human
being too so, yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: Well, speaking of
generosity, thank you for being
so generous with our time.
>> Adrienne Lundgren: Thank
you so much for having me.
[Applauding]
>> Jer Thorp: In the 1950s the
mathematician and metrologist,
Edward Lorenz was
thinking about the weather.
Now, Lorenz was experimenting
with statistical forecasting,
but he found that his
simulations didn't match the
messy, wet, reality
of the real world.
Weather, right?
So Lorenz set up to
development a nonlinear model
that would match the
unpredictability of the nature.
In 1963 he published
a paper called,
"The Thermostatic Nonperiodic
Flow" in the Journal
of Atmospheric Sciences, which
laid down the foundations
for an entire branch of
mathematics called Chaos Theory,
chaos systems are being
and that they start off
quite predictable.
After a certain amount of time
though they Saturday to behave
in a way which for
a lot of intents
and purposes resembles
randomness,
this is why weather forecasters
can only predict the weather ten
days out.
One of the things that
define the chaotic system is
that it's particularly
sensitive to initial conditions.
That is, the state of the system
when it starts has a huge effect
on how it will behave
long into the future.
This idea that these
extraordinary, elaborate,
mathematical structures could be
to dependant on minute changes
in their state, right at the
beginning eventually gave rise
to a famous term
that Lorenz coined,
"The Butterfly Effect"
Lorenz's model,
particularly The Lorenz
Attractor is a set
of three symboled
differential equations,
there are three constants
called Sigma, Rho and Beta
which define those that
delicate initial conditions
that we spoke about.
By changing the values
of these numbers,
the system can now put a vast
monastery on strange geometries,
from tight spirals to messy
tangles of loops and curls.
Set to a very particular set
of values, 28/10 and 8 over 3,
the Lorenz Attractor
outputs a structure
which anyone would
have to admit,
looks an awful lot
like a butterfly.
It's when we watch that
butterfly emerge though
by setting the system
free to animate over time
that we get a real sense of the
beauty of the Lorenz Attractor.
We see how it lives through
long periods of regularity
where we start to recognize
a pattern only to seemingly
at random to switch
course or change direction.
Joel? Can you tell us what the
Lorenz Attractor looks like?
>> Joel Snyder: Sure.
This image features swirls
of lines or is it one line,
that turns and curves in two
connected parts, each comprised
of oval shapes enlarging
from a core
into the arched collection
of swirls.
At left, it leans to the
left while the right series
of ovals leans to the right.
Overall, two angled and
mincing eyes or a stark,
colorless butterfly on the wing.
>> Joel Thorp: My third and last
guest today is Kathleen O'Neil
archive specialist
in the manuscript division
here at the library.
Hi, Kathleen.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Hi.
>> Joel Thorp: Welcome to
the Artists in the Archive.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Hi.
>> Joel Thorp: So
Kathleen was one
of the first people
I met at the library.
I went on this grand
extraordinary tour
of all the rooms and as many of
the collections as I can get to
and the Kathleen showed
us the manuscript division
and at the end of the
tour, sort of more
or less offhand she said,
over is the original Lorenz
Attractor software [laughter]
and I being me was
like, let's go see it.
And so we saw it, but maybe we
start by talking a little bit
about the manuscript division,
what it holds, what have kinds
of things belong in
the manuscript division
and then we can move on
to the Lorenz collection.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Well,
the manuscript division
collects the personal papers
and organizational records of
people and organizations that
and cultural significance
to the United States,
where it's suppose to
document the cultural history,
that means the political, art
science and the everyday lives
of the American people.
And we have over eleven thousand
collections some are small
as a single item, others
like the NAACP records
is millions of items.
We mostly collect manuscripts,
but we do some 3D objects,
we have photographs, we have
scrapbooks, there's an example
of almost any type of material
that you could find and now
as we are collecting these
more modern collections,
we're getting born
digital materials.
So that's our new frontier.
>> Jer Thorp: If you look on
the libraries Wikipedia page
or anywhere else, they'll
give you numbers for all
of the other departments about
how much they hold and then
for the manuscripts departments
there's like seriously lots,
that's, that's how much it
has because, like, almost
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Well,
they say seventy million items
but of course, it depends
on how you count an item.
>> Jer Thorp: Right.
And you have some items on your
lap and we'll talk about this
in a moment, but you
processed this particular help
to process this particular
collection.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: I processed
the born digital materials,
but the Lorenz collection came
to the library in about 2008,
2009 and it was processed by
Joseph Brooks an archivist
in the manuscript division,
he processed the paper
and paper portion
of the collection is
about fifteen thousand items
it's forty four hundred boxes
and twelve oversized boxes,
which for the manuscript
division is a relatively small
collection, but the born
digital materials that came
in included a CPU, an eight
inch floppy a couple of five
and a quarter inch floppy,
three and a half inch floppy,
and some optical disks; and
at the time when they came
in we didn't have
the tools we needed
to process those materials
but in the last several years
and this is one of
the things that I love
about this collection, is
that sometimes you have these
collections that draw you
out into the library where you
get to draw in the expertise
of other divisions
and other people
and the preservation has been
developing a forensic station
down in preservation and Amanda
May who has saved my life more
than once, I've developed a
work flow to recover to five
and a quarter inch floppies.
So at that point, which was
about a year or two ago,
we felt we were ready to
tackle the CPU and the five
and a quarter inch floppy, the
eight inch floppy will have
to wait for another day and
so that's why we decided
to process it last year.
>> Jer Thorp: We are going
to use some real software
from the 1980s and '70s
momentarily but we're going
to get there in a minute.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Okay.
>> Jer Thorp: The manuscript
division is just not only kind a
record of history itself,
but I think it also is it's
like the [inaudible] thing
around history in this case,
we have a collection
which starts near
or before the beginning
of computation,
of modern computation
and that ends very,
very much in the
modern computational era
and the reason why I
didn't show you a picture
when Joel described
the Lorenz Attractor is
because this is how it
existed in Edward Lorenz's head
in the beginning because the
computation power was not
available to rendered it.
Can you show us the
first diagram?
Yeah. This one, we'll
start with this one.
And to give a sense of what
that process would have looked
like on stage, and we'll post
this image to the finding aid,
is a piece of graph
paper, right?
Yeah it's got marks on it in
pencil and so you can image
that this grand idea, which
we'll talk in a second
about how this came up because
I think it's really fascinating.
Would have emerged not as a
whole, but as small fragments
over a course of
years and decades.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Yeah.
I mean, I think the
thing that struck me is
because as I processed the born
digital I didn't ignore the
paper, I needed to
look at the paper
so I could understand the
relationship between the two
and a lot of times
it was the paper
that told me what the born
digital materials were,
but with how handmade
everything is
and the labor of
scientific work.
Which is so clear when you see
these all these tiny little dots
that needed to be
plotted and later, I mean,
we talked about this there's,
you know, they've just run
out of room the graph
paper it's not big enough
>> Jer Thorp: That second image
because this is a great example
of that where Lorenz begins to
plot, perhaps the first plot
of the attractor only to realize
that he's run out
of graph paper.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Yeah.
So that's whoops, I
have it turned wrong.
That's half of it and so
there's lots of graph paper
and also here's another
I'll just hold this one up,
this is sort of an
expanded version of that
and so there's dozens of these
and so if you were really smart
and knew what you were
doing, you could lay them
out on the floor
like a jigsaw puzzle
or a [inaudible] can
put them together
but the front should I show the
>> Jer Thorp: Not yet.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Not yet.
Okay.
>> Jer Thorp: Let's
save that for the end
and I'll do maybe a
poor man's Joel here
and say what we're looking
is kind of an 8 1/2x11 piece
of green line graph paper and
on are penciled but also blue
and red ink lines something that
to my mind represents that kind
of like curl inside
of a snail shell,
it's kind of this little
piece of mathematics
which to Lorenz would have been
real proof of something that,
again, more or less he would
have had to hold in his mind.
The Lorenz Attractor itself,
which we'll show in a second,
was born of convince, right?
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Yes.
>> Jer Thorp: Can you
tell us the story?
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Well the
story that he tells in his book,
"The Essence of Chaos" is he
was running a series of data
and the data had gone out to
six decimal points and which
because he wanted the
numbers to lineup and not kick
down to the next line on the
printout, he rounded them
to three decimal points and I
should say this computer took
up half of his office,
it was incredibly nosey,
just the computer
not even the printer.
>> Jer Thorp: Yeah.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: And the
printer was one of those if any
of you remember and I do, those
old printers with the sprockets
that you had pull the
sides of the computer,
you know, what is the word?
Not serrated, but you know
what I mean, but thank you off
when you were done that
was incredibly loud.
So he goes and gets a cup
of coffee and comes back
and he realizes he wants to run
another set of data and instead
of inputting the
original numbers,
he input the rounded numbers
and goes and gets another cup
of coffee and he comes back and
he is surprised by what he sees
because initially the
data tracks exactly
with the first plotting
of the data,
but as and I think he said it
takes about an hour or something
to plot a day, as a time goes
on the data starts converging
and it's not behaving in
the way he expected it to.
>> Jer Thorp: This story
is mind blowing to me
and so chaos is a
theory with a slow burn,
this paper that I mentioned
earlier was only cited ten times
in the following
decade by people outside
of his particular field.
So it was not an immediate
success, but to put in a framing
which I think it deserves, it
is said this when we look back
on the 20th century we will see
three great advances in math
and physics those
being relatively,
quantum mechanics and chaos.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Yes.
>> Jer Thorp: So this thing
that came out of a trip
to get a coffee and routing
error became something
really amazing.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Yeah.
I just to want say one thing,
I noticed I was looking
through a new folder today in
preparation for today and much
of the correspondence is people
writing to Lorenz saying,
can I get a copy of your
paper it's out of print.
>> Jer Thorp: Yeah.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: And he
credits another scientist
for handing out copies of his
papers to people for the spread
of the idea and its
application in economics
and physiology and other areas.
>> Jer Thorp: Everywhere.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: And
actually, so we're going
to show you some
software here and I think
in almost all cases the software
that we're showing you
is written by people
who were interested
in the applications
of Chaos Theory in
on their fields.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: So this first one
that I think we'll show is
this software by Atlee Jackson
at the Center for
Complex Systems Research
at the [inaudible] Institute
and I'll show you a little bit
about how this works and then
we can talk a little bit.
So I'm going to ask
for the we'll have
to use cap locks caps here,
Lorenz Attractor and I'm going
to ask for an [inaudible] goal.
Oh, is so exciting, isn't it?
But now I have to enter in
some numbers which are sort
of rough equivalence to what
I was talking about before
where the initial conditions are
really going to change the way
that this runs, but you've been
holding the Lorenz Attractor
in your head and now we get
to see in it, in a what year,
do you remember what year this
Atlee Jackson software was
>> Kathleen O'Neil: You know
what, I have it on a piece
of paper over there, I don't
remember off the top of my head,
but I can tell you later.
>> Jer Thorp: So the yellow
line is one that's going
to render this, sort of,
classic Lorenz Attractor form
and you'll notice that what
it does is kind of similar
to what I was describing before
where it follows these kinds
of periods where you think you
know what it's going to do next
and then it does something that
you don't know it will do next,
and I think there's an
important delineation
to be made here been randomness
and chaos the system is not
random, but it's chaotic.
Which I think is a really
interesting division
to make, right?
If it were random this
computer couldn't simulate,
but because it has these kind
of free equations striving it,
it does continue, you know,
we can run this essentially
forever,
we'd be getting eventually this
really beautiful butterfly form
that we're use to.
>>Kathleen O'Neil:
I'm not going to speak
to the mathematics of it.
But, you know, my understanding
of it is there wouldn't
be a butterfly
if it was truly chaotic.
>> Jer Thorp: Yeah.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Because the
image wouldn't recreate every
time, you would have a
different image, but.
>> Jer Thorp: So
here's another piece
of software I don't
have the name of this
>> Kathleen O'Neil: This
is actually my Mike Page
and Jim [inaudible] who created
for [inaudible] I hope I
pronounced his name correctly.
>> Jer Thorp: All right.
So I had this own all
quod up and I hope
that this sound is going to
work, here otherwise I'm going
to do some really good,
like, 1980s computer sounds
for you all because
that's the kind of things
that we're looking for here.
I actually think I have to
drop out of full screen to get
All right.
So I've got to send
it, the insert key
because I do not have an insert
see when I get to that point.
Hang on one second to
I do not want to add,
so chaos we're going
do the experiment,
we're going to get some data.
So I'm going to load this
data file, here's where I have
to send it, the insert
key and it'll tell me
which data sets I can
load, there's a little dock
down MNA asked for this one,
KNH, chaos, we'll load that data
and now I'm going
to go plot that data
and I want plat speed
slow, the sound is on,
think we're ready,
are you ready for it?
Oh, come on people.
Sound excited.
All right.
Let's do it.
It's beeping, [laughter]
[Video playing]
You know it's easy, I think it's
easy for some of us to laugh
when we look at this software,
but I think it's important
to realize with this one
and for the one we saw last
that for these mathematicians
and scientist this is
in many cases the first time
they were seeing this thing,
it was this first
confirmation of something
that I think they must have
felt was something amazing
and to see it or to hear it,
it must have been a revelation.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: But
there's only a few letters
that are associated with the
software in this collection,
but the letters that
are you get that sense,
like this is your data, you
know, you're writing to him,
I created this to show your
data and Lorenz also said
at one point that, you
know, it's the ability
to change the variables, it's
not the initial computation
that it's so difficult
they said, you know,
people did these kind
of computations way back
to the Greeks, it's the need
to do multiple variations on it
and he said, I'd
probably would have given
up without a computer.
>> Jer Thorp: And actually,
the earliest software
that we have we couldn't
get running.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Yeah.
>> Jer Thorp: We tried our best.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: That's 1986.
>> Jer Thorp: But
the person who wrote
that software actually speaks
to this so when he said,
micro computers have been
a great boom to dynamics
because they permit
the researcher
to create a much more
flexible environment
than is generally possible
with large computers,
so here I think a
big benefit to see,
what was happening
here compared to like
that old room sized computer
that you were talking
to was there was the flexibility
to, kind, of see these things
over and over again and
actually, I was actually to this
about to one of our
previous guests,
John Hesler who reminded
me he is a topologist
and a mathematician, that's
important that the we don't talk
about Lorenz discovering
this thing
because it already
was there, right?
It was like these
[inaudible] for more or less
on earth thing this'll
beautiful, magical thing
that is core to the way
that this whole world works.
Well, let's show one more
thing because it's the best.
>> Kathleen O'Neil: Okay.
>> Jer Thorp: And
sometimes I think by looking
at the materials you get
some sense of the person,
we heard this from
our last guest
of F. Holland Day we can
look at those photographs
and get some sense
of the person.
That can sometimes be harder to
get from computational diagrams
and from plots on graph paper,
but we have something really
delightful that was part
of the Lorenz collection.
>> Kathleen O'Neil:
And I'm going
to show the scientific
version of it first.
So this is I'm not sure whether
this is the butterfly turned
in a different angle or whether
there's different valuables
happening here, but it clearly
to me it looks like a heart.
And, again, this was one
of the delightful things
about the handmade element
of this collection is there's a
computer generated version of it
and then down here,
I saw this and I was
like why is it printing on
the right side of the paper?
But on the bottom it says,
"I'm strangely attracted
to you" [laughter] so he was
making a Valentine [laughter]
or sending a message of
love perhaps to his wife,
we don't know, but
it makes you wonder
and that's what I love about it.
>> Jer Thorp: Thank
you Kathleen.
>> Kathleen O'Neil:
You're welcome.
[Applauding]
[Music]
>> Jer Thorp: What part of high
school did math exist inside
of Cartesian coordinates?
X, Y and ZED, but the fact is
that math doesn't care about
or four are made up axes.
Indeed we can set up a Lorenz
Attractor inside any space we
can imagine, real world
space or computational space,
or emotional space, or flavor
space, or whatever we want.
I want you to imagine for a
moment or the room you're in,
or the bus, or the Subway
cars filled with words,
every word in the English
language floating in space.
Over there by the door is
the cluster of fruit words,
pear and apple and
orange and cumquat.
Right under your chair are
all the synonyms for love.
Above your head are hope
and dreams and imagination.
Proper announce are here
as well in dense clusters,
the presidents are
over near the window.
Just beside them are all
the countries and states
and provinces and cities.
There's New York in
the center of it all,
hey I didn't write
the algorithm.
If you look back at that
cluster of fruits by the door,
you'll see that the apple has
been pulled closer to New York,
drawn to it by so many
pop culture references.
As an experiment I thought
I'd build the attractor
in this word space
and see if the path
of the butterfly could be used
to generate a series of words
that might resemble some
sort of geometric poetry.
So I used a corpus of three
million English language words
and their relationships
to create this three
dimensional map of language.
I let the attractor
do its thing inside
of this gigantic word cloud
and recorded the results.
Now remember, these
attractors are very sensitive
to initial conditions so making
small changes really affects the
sculpture of their
attractor and thus,
the kind of so called
poem that they output.
So here is words space and word
space is a three dimensional
object so on the screen in
front of me there's a cloud
of points each representing
a word
and these words are clustered as
in the example I've described,
so certain related words will
be in one place so I can jump
over maybe to series of words
that are somewhat related,
there's balancing and
coordinate next to each other.
I'm going to jump over to some
proper nouns like we described,
there's Saskatchewan and Chaney
for some reason and Federer
and then finally, I'll jump over
to this little narrow tendril
of years which are
so often found next
to each other in our texts.
So what happens if we let
the Lorenz Attractor loose
in this space?
Well, we see our now familiar
butterfly shape appear
and we can ask for that
butterfly to give us some poems.
Now, with Robert in the
room I to want be careful
that these are not in fact,
poems that they are structures
of words which help us
maybe explore this vast
and confusing space of language,
now, this particular poem,
I'm not going to take a chance
to read it, but I will read
to you a few of the outputs
that came out of this software.
If I can find my notes amongst
this gigantic pile of things.
This dynamic ride itself sounds
this variable declaration,
this online spell it
sounds this online location.
The ranks of beauty, one
is beauty and the beauty
at tribute is one imported of
its export review and export
of the export imported of
export and of the export
of its obstacles matches
the symbolic to itself.
Supply the sustainable carrying,
supply of the placement,
the carrying of the review,
supply is the rank and the rank
of the sympodic is to supply
max supply, works, ranks,
apply of the export, reply
obstacles, thinking, licensing,
reply the obstacles,
the obstacles symbolic,
warring obstacles.
Yes, heaven itself and
specialty, specialty,
and specialty imported in
natural, itself natural grace,
grace translation and reply
in [inaudible] translation,
the translation, the translation
of the translations travel
and dates and objections
and objects,
objection to host it's
host of the ranking crash,
a crash ruled cast
printed, printed of
and innovative an explosive,
an explosive demand of lit of,
lit of its demand this
variable, variable spell,
exported of this variable talks,
yes, younger, younger genius
of classification and of
this competitive supply,
classification, this
competitive, competitive spell.
Reply the symbolic
reporting, rely the specialty,
the reporting of the
translation, fly the travel
and the objection of the
ranking, to match fly, works,
fears, supply the demands,
supply motives, feeling,
receiving, classification,
supply these announcements,
these announcements
competitive, warring statements.
Now, I should mention a little
bit about how this constructed
because it is not in
fact, an exact random walk
through Lorenz space,
well, let's take that back,
it is but those words are then
sent through a poetic structure
which we've assembled through
recording a particular poet,
Robert can you guess
the structure?
It was Walt Whitman it was
the structure of the that poem
which I thought conducted
itself nicely to the kind
of weird randomness
of it and again,
I don't feel the these
things are themselves poets,
but the way of using
the spirit of Whitman
to explore this mathematical
space, this linguistic space
in a way which we might find to
be interesting or intriguing.
Now, as I mentioned, Kathleen
showed me the Lorenz Attractor
on the first day of my residency
and since then it's been
on the front of my mind.
Overlaying all of the work
I've been doing as a kind
of tenacious after image
as I'm approaching the end
of my time here I hope that my
own creative path will have a
lot in common with
the strange attractor.
It may have started
in predictable space,
following in expected pattern,
but now is the time I hope
that it veers wildly into chaos.
Now, push all those
words out of the room,
[inaudible] out the windows,
sweep them down the drawn,
push them out of the windows,
let's instead fill the room
with everything the
library holds, all the maps,
and manuscripts and obvious
and interviews and of course,
books so many books; let's put
all the tweets in there too
and website's and animated
gifts, like our words,
these library things
are now organized
by their relationships,
that big messy ball
in the center is the civil war.
F. Holland Day I think
we can all agree,
is off in the corner somewhere.
I've been thinking
a lot about how we
as human navigate this
space, through the website
or in person, in one of the
libraries reading rooms.
If we plotted one
person's course
through it space it
would almost always show
up as one little point a densely
tangled knot occupying just one
tiny little mote in vast galaxy
of information and that's
because we come to the
library with something to find,
we come to the library
with something to seek,
our paths are nothing
like those elegant sweeps
of the Lorenz Attractor.
Now, I was born in 1975,
I got my first computer
when I was nine, when I
went to the university
in 1992 I taught Internet
classes in the library,
there were two words that I
would use a lot back then,
twenty five years ago, that
are earlier ever used at all
when I we talk about the
internet these words are hyper
and surf.
The term hyper comes
from mathematics,
it refers to an extension
a generalized a kind
of radical opening.
The word surfing comes,
well from surfing.
To serve the web was to
be carried off by a force
of curiosity not quite
sure when you're headed.
So far in my residency I've made
abstract maps and strange clocks
and wide color pallets, I
put together artist names
and the invitation lists
for strange cocktail parties
and I've turned the
Lorenz Attractor
into a vehicles for
exploring text.
All of those endeavors,
I think, have been trying
to do the same thing,
to bring hyper back,
to bring surfing back
to find nonlinear ways
through this building
and amongst all the wonderful
things that it holds.
All these strange paths,
here for untrodden.
>> The End of the Trail.
Copy of German Invasion
plan found by Captain Candy
in [inaudible] Ruins shortly
after the great Allied Bombing
of October 1944, which
marked the last phase
of German retreat from Greece.
One map, color, untracing
lenient 52x32 centimeters.
>> St. Georgia's
Preflight Station view
from the southwest showing the
rock as it appeared at the end
of the working season and
the method of landing men
from the [inaudible] Paul J.
Pelz one photomechanical print.
>> Some of the Montgomery
marchers wave the American Flag
in front of the Alabama
State Capital at the end
of their five day March.
New York World Telegraph
1965, one photographic print.
>> This time it vanished quite
slowly beginning with the end
of the tail and ending
with a grin,
Alice in Wonderland,
Herbert Block, 1977.
One drawing, graphite and
ink brushed with opaque white
over blue pencil under drawing
with overlay 57.7x35.8
centimeters.
>> Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial
Church, Berlin, Germany.
After the end of World War
II showing bomb damage.
Unknown photographer 1946,
one photographic print.
>> Francis Preston Blair and his
wife, Violet Gist as they looked
at the end of the Civil
War in the United States.
Unknown photographer, 1865,
one photographic print.
>> What in the end
will settle this war?
Trained men, it is your duty
to become one, enlist now!
London Paramilitary Recruiting
Company, 1915, one print,
poster, lithograph,
color, 75x25 centimeters.
>> The Dream at the End
Of The world, Paul Bowles
and the Literary
Renegades in Tangier.
Michelle Greene,
1991, 381 pages.
>> Our differences
have nothing to do
with the end result
we are seeking,
Herbert Block, 1952 one drawing.
>> Nearing the End of a
Noble Life, Chief Louison,
NA [inaudible] 1908,
one photographic print
on stereo card, stereograph.
>> The End of the
World as We Know It
and Other Entertainments,
Donald Kaul, 1979, 153 pages.
>> Twelve Pieces for the End
of the Century Piano Solo,
David [inaudible] 2005,
two volumes of music.
>> To See the Earth before
the End of the World,
Ed Robertson, 2010, 161 pages.
>>Everyone says that at
the End of the World,
Owen Egerton, 2013, 336 pages.
>> Poem for the End of
Time and Other Poems,
Noelle Kocot, 2006, 59 pages.
>> The End of the Civic
Repertory Theatre,
Aaron Siskind, 1938,
one portfolio,
fourteen photographic prints.
>> End of the World
Is Los Angeles,
Francois Camoin, 1982, 94 pages.
>> Is This the End
of the Experiment?
Herbert Block, 1946,
one drawing.
>> The Creek at the
End of the Lawns,
Ira Joe Fisher, 2012, 124 pages.
>> The Ice at the
End of the World,
Robert Siegel, 1994, 242 pages.
>> The Palm at the
End of the Mind,
Wallace Stevens,
1971, 404 pages.
>> Is This the End
of Little Rico?
Daniel Ort, 1998, 72 pages.
>> At the End of the Woods Path,
Lulu Brower Chittenden, 1924,
190 pages, last two pages blank.
>> At the End of the Open Road,
Louis Simpson, 1963, 70 pages.
>> The End of the Titanic in
the Sea, William Jackson, 1912,
one score, five leaves.
>> The end of summer: Trio for
clarinet, violin, and piano,
Ned Rorem, 1986,
one score, 48 pages.
>> The End of The Novel of Love,
Vivian Gornick, 1997, 165 pages.
>> The End of the Class War.
>> The End of the Alphabet.
>> The End of the Rainbow.
>> The End of the
Straight and Narrow.
>> The End of the 19th Century.
>> The End of the Circle.
>> The End of the Story.
>> The End of the
Trail of Tears.
>> The End of the Far West.
>> The End of the
Endless Summer.
>> The End of the Palestinian
and Israelis Conflict.
>> The End of the Matter.
>> The End of the Affair.
>> The End of the
Titanic at Sea.
>> The End of Everything Man.
>> The End of Innocence,
Don Henley.
1989, one score 64, pages.
>> Then we came to the End
Joshua Farris, 2008, 476 pages.
>> Praise to the End, Theodore
Roethke, 1951, 89 pages.
>> John Dies at the End,
David Wong, 2009, 375 pages.
>> The end: Seven songs
for bass/baritone solo,
1992, 11 pages of music.
>> The End, Rockwell Kent,
1927, one print, wood engraving.
>> The End, [inaudible]
2008, 336 pages.
>> The End, Joe Frank, 1983, one
sound cassette, thirty minutes.
>> The End, Nico, 1974.
One sound disk.
>> Artists in the Archive
is recorded by Jer Thorp
and produced by Greta Weber.
Special thanks throughout
this week to Jennifer Cutting,
John Sayers, and Joel Snyder.
The music you hear
at the beginning
of the episode was a traditional
[inaudible] Alfredo Romero
and recorded in Rio Hondo,
New Mexico in July of 1940.
The song you're hearing right
now is Goodbye Booze performed
by Charles Fulton and recorded
in Oakland, California in 1939.
As always, we'll post links to
all the materials we featured
in the podcast on our
find aide which is
at
artistsofthearchive.tumbler.com
[Music]
[Applauding]
This has been a presentation
of the Library of Congress.
Visit us at: Loc.gov